.TH wad64 5
.SH NAME

wad64 — A simple archive format for storing data

.SH SYNOPSIS

.IB filename .wad64

.SH DESCRIPTION

The
.B wad64
file format is a simplistic archive format based on the WAD file format used by id
Tech 1 games, such as Doom and Heretic. Wad64 uses the exact same directory layout as a classic WAD
file but uses 64 bit offsets, which both allows for larger archives, and larger contained files.
Also, "lump" names may be up to 255 characters, instead of 8, and do not have to be all uppercase
letters and numbers. Still some restrictions applies to names, in order to make sure that extrating
archived files does not mess up the user's directory structure.

.B wad64
is suitable whenever full random access is needed to the archive content. Both the directory, and
the file lumps, can be accessed directly, since all file offsets and sizes are known. Furthermore,
.B wad64
because
.B wad64
does not use any compression, it is possible to seek inside a lump.

.SH FORMAT

Numbers in a
.B wad64
are encoded in Little Endian byte order.


.SS File header

A
.B wad64
file begins with the following header:

struct
WadInfo {
.br
    char    identification[8];
.br
    int64_t numlumps;
.br
    int64_t infotablesofs;
.br
};

.TP 16
.B identification
is the magic number that must read xWAD64, followed by a linefeed charachter (ASCII 10), and a nul
byte.

.TP
.B numlumps
is the number of "lumps" in the archive.

.TP
.B infotablesofs
is the offset in bytes from the beginning of the file to the first entry in the directory. Since the
file header is 24 bytes, it cannot be less than 24.


.SS File lumps

The directory entries have the following format:

struct FileLump {
.br
    int64_t filepos;
.br
    int64_t size;
.br
    char    name[256];
.br
};

.TP 16
.B filepos
is the offset in bytes from the beginning of the file to the current lump

.TP
.B size
is the size of the current lump in bytes

.TP
.B name
is the name of the lump. The name must be a valid UTF-8 string that satisfies the following rules:

.RS
.IP
The name must end with a nul terminator
.IP
The name must not begin with '-'
.IP
The name must not contain any charachter with codepoints [0, 32[. Note: though the name itself
cannot contain the nul byte, it must end with it.
.IP
The name must not contain any charachter that is forbidden by Microsoft® Windows® or DOS variants.
It may contain path separators though.
.IP
If interpreted as a file path, it must not escape outside current working directory. Thus any '../'
or '..\\' is forbidden. Also, the sequences './' and '.\\' are forbidden, as is two following
slashes.
.RE

.SH MEDIA TYPE
At the time of writing, there is no official media type. Applications can use

application/x-wad64

to identify wad64 files.

.SH BUGS

See GitHub Issues: <https://github.com/milasudril/wad64/issues>

.SH AUTHOR

Torbjörn Rathsman

.SH SEE ALSO

wad64(1)